整形

整形又称整型或整容，是指透过外科手术改变身体外观。整形通常指脸部整型，包括割双眼皮、垫下巴、隆鼻、嫩唇、造酒窝痘、种睫毛等。不少人以为矫形理解为整形，但两者实属不同。整形并非身体上的缺陷或伤残，是当事人因自己个人喜好或其他非医疗上的原因，以外科手术改变自己的外观，手术其实是没有必要，而且外观的看法是很主观的，就算把多位明星最优美的部位，组合再一起也不见得好看，每个人喜欢的类型都不同，这是没有一定的。矫形则是因为疾病、后天因素或意外导致永久的身体缺陷或伤残，可透过以外科手术补救或矫正，而这类手术通常是有需要或必须的。

在韩国和欧美，整容情况颇为普遍。根据国际美容整形外科学会（ISAPS）报告指，南韩19至49岁女性中，有20%人曾接受整容手术。整体而言，每77人中有1人曾整形，以双眼皮及隆鼻手术属最热门。另一边厢，高达五分之三好莱坞女演员曾经易容

于美国整形外科学会统计，2015年男性进行整容外科手术的总数有120万人，而受访的31%男性表示极有可能考虑整容手术。而与吸脂、眼部提升一同列入五大最受欢迎手术的亦有乳房缩小。国外模特儿Stefan Toic亦曾公开表示尝试改变饮食希望缩小乳房也没有用，最终亦进行了此项手术。

韩国的大型连锁医美诊所Dermaster Clinic的权汉镇院长接受访问时表示大型医院、连锁式经营的医美诊所提供的疗程并不一定比小型的有保障，最看重的是治疗师的经验和技巧，而且不太建议在匆匆的旅行行程中接受美容疗程。

Treatments for the plastic repair of a broken nose are first mentioned in the Edwin Smith Papyrus, a transcription of an Ancient Egyptian medical text, one of the oldest known surgical treatises, dated to the Old Kingdom from 3000 to 2500 BC. Reconstructive surgery techniques were being carried out in India by 800 BC. Sushruta was a physician who made important contributions to the field of plastic and cataract surgery in 6th century BC. The medical works of both Sushruta and Charak, originally in Sanskrit, were translated into the Arabic language during the Abbasid Caliphate in 750 AD. The Arabic translations made their way into Europe via intermediaries. In Italy, the Branca family of Sicily and Gaspare Tagliacozzi (Bologna) became familiar with the techniques of Sushruta.
Statue of Sushrut, the Father of Plastic Surgery, at Haridwar
British physicians traveled to India to see rhinoplasties being performed by Indian methods. Reports on Indian rhinoplasty performed by a Kumhar vaidya were published in the Gentleman's Magazine by 1794. Joseph Constantine Carpue spent 20 years in India studying local plastic surgery methods. Carpue was able to perform the first major surgery in the Western world in the year of 1815. Instruments described in the Sushruta Samhita were further modified in the Western world.
The Roman scholar Aulus Cornelius Celsus recorded surgical techniques, including plastic surgery, in the first century AD. The Romans also performed plastic cosmetic surgery. The Romans were able to perform simple techniques, such as repairing damaged ears, from around the 1st century BC. For religious reasons, they did not dissect either human beings or animals, thus their knowledge was based in its entirety on the texts of their Greek predecessors. Notwithstanding, Aulus Cornelius Celsus left some surprisingly accurate anatomical descriptions, some of which — for instance, his studies on the genitalia and the skeleton — are of special interest to plastic surgery.

In 1465, Sabuncu's book, description, and classification of hypospadias was more informative and up to date. Localization of urethral meatus was described in detail. Sabuncuoglu also detailed the description and classification of ambiguous genitalia. In mid-15th-century Europe, Heinrich von Pfolspeundt described a process "to make a new nose for one who lacks it entirely, and the dogs have devoured it" by removing skin from the back of the arm and suturing it in place. However, because of the dangers associated with surgery in any form, especially that involving the head or face, it was not until the 19th and 20th centuries that such surgery became common.

Up until the use of anesthesia became established, surgeries involving healthy tissues involved great pain. Infection from surgery was reduced by the introduction of sterile techniques and disinfectants. The invention and use of antibiotics, beginning with sulfonamide and penicillin, was another step in making elective surgery possible.

In 1793, François Chopart performed operative procedure on a lip using a flap from the neck. In 1814, Joseph Carpue successfully performed operative procedure on a British military officer who had lost his nose to the toxic effects of mercury treatments. In 1818, German surgeon Carl Ferdinand von Graefe published his major work entitled Rhinoplastik. Von Graefe modified the Italian method using a free skin graft from the arm instead of the original delayed pedicle flap. 

The first American plastic surgeon was John Peter Mettauer, who, in 1827, performed the first cleft palate operation with instruments that he designed himself. In 1845, Johann Friedrich Dieffenbach wrote a comprehensive text on rhinoplasty, titled Operative Chirurgie, and introduced the concept of reoperation to improve the cosmetic appearance of the reconstructed nose. 

In 1891, American otorhinolaryngologist John Roe presented an example of his work: a young woman on whom he reduced a dorsal nasal hump for cosmetic indications. In 1892, Robert Weir experimented unsuccessfully with xenografts (duck sternum) in the reconstruction of sunken noses. In 1896, James Israel, a urological surgeon from Germany, and in 1889 George Monks of the United States each described the successful use of heterogeneous free-bone grafting to reconstruct saddle nose defects. In 1898, Jacques Joseph, the German orthopaedic-trained surgeon, published his first account of reduction rhinoplasty. In 1928, Jacques Joseph published Nasenplastik und Sonstige Gesichtsplastik.

Walter Yeo, a sailor injured at the Battle of Jutland, is assumed to have received plastic surgery in 1917. The photograph shows him before (left) and after (right) receiving a flap surgery performed by Gillies
The father of modern plastic surgery is generally considered to have been Sir Harold Gillies. A New Zealand otolaryngologist working in London, he developed many of the techniques of modern facial surgery in caring for soldiers suffering from disfiguring facial injuries during the First World War.

During World War I he worked as a medical minder with the Royal Army Medical Corps. After working with the renowned French oral and maxillofacial surgeon Hippolyte Morestin on skin graft, he persuaded the army's chief surgeon, Arbuthnot-Lane, to establish a facial injury ward at the Cambridge Military Hospital, Aldershot, later upgraded to a new hospital for facial repairs at Sidcup in 1917. There Gillies and his colleagues developed many techniques of plastic surgery; more than 11,000 operations were performed on more than 5,000 men (mostly soldiers with facial injuries, usually from gunshot wounds).After the war, Gillies developed a private practice with Rainsford Mowlem, including many famous patients, and travelled extensively to promote his advanced techniques worldwide.
In 1930, Gillies' cousin, Archibald McIndoe, joined the practice and became committed to plastic surgery. When World War II broke out, plastic surgery provision was largely divided between the different services of the armed forces, and Gillies and his team were split up. Gillies himself was sent to Rooksdown House near Basingstoke, which became the principal army plastic surgery unit; Tommy Kilner (who had worked with Gillies during the First World War, and who now has a surgical instrument named after him, the kilner cheek retractor), went to Queen Mary's Hospital, Roehampton, and Mowlem to St Albans. McIndoe, consultant to the RAF, moved to the recently rebuilt Queen Victoria Hospital in East Grinstead, Sussex, and founded a Centre for Plastic and Jaw Surgery. There, he treated very deep burn, and serious facial disfigurement, such as loss of eyelids, typical of those caused to aircrew by burning fuel.

McIndoe is often recognized for not only developing new techniques for treating badly burned faces and hands but also for recognising the importance of the rehabilitation of the casualties and particularly of social reintegration back into normal life. He disposed of the "convalescent uniforms" and let the patients use their service uniforms instead. With the help of two friends, Neville and Elaine Blond, he also convinced the locals to support the patients and invite them to their homes. McIndoe kept referring to them as "his boys" and the staff called him "The Boss" or "The Maestro."

His other important work included development of the walking-stalk skin graft, and the discovery that immersion in saline promoted healing as well as improving survival rates for victims with extensive burns — this was a serendipitous discovery drawn from observation of differential healing rates in pilots who had come down on land and in the sea. His radical, experimental treatments led to the formation of the Guinea Pig Club at Queen Victoria Hospital, Sussex. Among the better known members of his "club" were Richard Hillary, Bill Foxley and Jimmy Edwards.

在医学上，整形外科是外科学中的一个分科。医疗临床实践中，它属于外科其中一个次专科。

整形外科也可称为整复外科，分为两个部分：「整形修复」（）以及「美容」（），目的在使用外科的技巧改变人的外表与功能。


虽然整容愈来愈普遍，但危险性极高。香港和中国大陆早前便证实了聚丙烯醯胺凝胶（PAAG，有用于隆乳上）会致癌，有很多人都被逼把物料拿出来。1994年度阿根廷小姐Solange Magnano在2009年11月底因进行隆臀部手术导致肺栓塞，因而死亡。

2010年首十国整容手术进行总数占全部之百分比。（注意此数据是计算手术进行占全球比例，并不是计算该国国民整容人数，例如在美国接受手术的可能是外国人）：


除了上述以手术或矫治方式达到改善外观的传统整形外，现今也另有一种微整型。微整型意即不需要透过手术，即可达达到改善外观或美容保养的效果，其优点为成本较低、且风险较小。

市面上常见的微整形概略可分为以下两种：


